Reliability in Azure Virtual Machines

Summarize this article for me
Azure Virtual Machines provides on-demand, scalable compute resources. As a foundational infrastructure service, it's designed to deliver enterprise-grade reliability and availability for mission-critical workloads.

When you use Azure, reliability is a shared responsibility. Microsoft provides a range of capabilities to support resiliency and recovery. You're responsible for understanding how those capabilities work within all of the services you use, and selecting the capabilities you need to meet your business objectives and uptime goals.

This article describes how to make Virtual Machines resilient to a variety of potential outages and problems, including transient faults, availability zone outages, region outages, and service maintenance. It also describes how you can use backups to recover from other types of problems, and highlights some key information about the Virtual Machines service level agreement (SLA).

 Important

When you consider the reliability of a virtual machine (VM), you also need to consider the reliability of your disks, network infrastructure, and applications that run on your VMs. Improving the resiliency of the VM alone might have limited impact if the other components aren't equally resilient. Depending on your resiliency requirements, you might need to make configuration changes across multiple areas.

Production deployment recommendations
For more information about how to deploy VMs to support your solution's reliability requirements and how reliability affects other aspects of your architecture, see Architecture best practices for Virtual Machines and scale sets in the Azure Well-Architected Framework.

Reliability architecture overview
VMs are the fundamental compute unit in Azure, whether you provision the VMs yourself or use other Azure compute services that transparently provision and manage them for you.

An individual VM is also known as a single instance VM. It runs on a specific host, which is a physical server. Most VMs share their host with other VMs.

When you create your VMs, you can influence where they run within the underlying infrastructure. Typically, you make placement decisions based on your requirements for reliability, latency, and isolation. Azure provides several configuration options that affect how your VMs are placed.

Region: You can select which Azure region that your VM should run in. A region is a geographic area that might contain multiple datacenters, each with a large number of hosts.

Availability zone: Availability zones are physically separate groups of datacenters within each Azure region. In regions that support availability zones, you can select which zone the VM runs in. For more information, see Resilience to availability zone failures.

Availability sets: An availability set is a logical grouping of VMs that allows Azure to understand how your application is built to provide for redundancy and availability.

When you use availability sets, Azure distributes a group of VMs across different fault domains. This distribution minimizes the risk of localized hardware failures by grouping VMs that share a common power source and network switch.

Availability sets can also place different VMs in different update domains, which controls how the Azure platform rolls out platform updates. By using update domains, you can ensure that only a subset of your VMs is restarted for updates at one time.

Proximity placement groups: For workloads that need to achieve the lowest possible latency between VMs, you can use a proximity placement group to ensure that Azure places the VMs physically close to each other. However, proximity placement means that an outage of the datacenter can affect all of the VMs in the group. To achieve high reliability, you might need to provision multiple proximity placement groups in different availability zones.

Dedicated hosts: You can use Azure Dedicated Host to provision your own physical server that runs one or more VMs, such as for strict compliance requirements. However, when you provision a dedicated host, an outage in its datacenter can affect all of the VMs on that host. To achieve high reliability, you might need to provision multiple dedicated hosts in different availability zones.

If you create a set of VMs that perform similar functions, consider using Azure Virtual Machine Scale Sets to create and manage the VMs as a group. Scale sets also provide more reliability options, such as spreading the VMs across multiple availability zones.

For more information about availability for VMs, see Availability options for Virtual Machines.

Resilience to transient faults
Transient faults are short, intermittent failures in components. They occur frequently in a distributed environment like the cloud, and they're a normal part of operations. Transient faults correct themselves after a short period of time. It's important that your applications can handle transient faults, usually by retrying affected requests.

All cloud-hosted applications should follow the Azure transient fault handling guidance when they communicate with any cloud-hosted APIs, databases, and other components. For more information, see Recommendations for handling transient faults.

Applications that run on your VMs should implement appropriate fault-handling strategies to ensure that any temporary interruptions in service don't affect your workload.

Resilience to availability zone failures
Availability zones are physically separate groups of datacenters within an Azure region. When one zone fails, services can fail over to one of the remaining zones.

An individual VM can be deployed in a zonal configuration, which means that it's pinned to a single availability zone that you select. By itself, a zonal VM isn't resilient to zone outages. However, you can create multiple VMs and place them in different availability zones, then spread your applications and data across the VM instances. Alternatively, you can use virtual machine scale sets to deploy a set of VMs across multiple availability zones.

If you don't configure a VM to be zonal, it's considered nonzonal or regional. Nonzonal VMs might be placed in any availability zone within the region. If any availability zone in the region experiences an outage, nonzonal VMs might be in the affected zone and can experience downtime.

Requirements
Region support: Zonal VMs can be deployed into any region that supports availability zones.

However, some VM types and sizes are only available in specific regions, or specific zones within a region. To check which regions and zones support the VM types that you need, use the following resources:

To check the VM types available in each region, see Products available by region.

To check the supported VM types and sizes within each zone of a specific region, see Check VM SKU availability.

Cost
There's no cost difference between a zonal and nonzonal VM.

Configure availability zone support
This section explains how to configure availability zone support for your VM instance.

 Note

When you select which availability zones to use, you're actually selecting the logical availability zone. If you deploy other workload components in a different Azure subscription, they might use a different logical availability zone number to access the same physical availability zone. For more information, see Physical and logical availability zones.

Create a zonal VM. You can create a zonal VM by using the following guides:

Create VMs in an availability zone by using the Azure portal
Create a VM in an availability zone by using the Azure CLI
Create a VM in an availability zone by using Azure PowerShell
Move an existing nonzonal VM to a zonal configuration. You can move from a nonzonal VM to a zonal VM. This process creates a new VM in the target availability zone and requires that you stop the VM during the move process. For more information, see Move Azure single instance VMs from regional to zonal target availability zones.

Migrate an existing nonzonal VM to a zonal configuration. You can migrate from a nonzonal VM to a zonal VM. This process requires shutting down the virtual machine, updating the zone properties, and starting it again. This feature is currently in preview. For more information, see Migrate to availability zones (preview).

Change the availability zone of an existing zonal VM. Zonal VMs can't be moved to a different availability zone. You need to deploy a new zonal VM in the desired availability zone instead.

Convert a zonal VM to a nonzonal configuration. Zonal VMs can't be converted to a nonzonal configuration. You need to deploy a new nonzonal VM instead.

Behavior when all zones are healthy
This section describes what to expect when VM instances are configured with availability zone support and all availability zones are operational.

Traffic routing between zones: You're responsible for routing traffic between VMs, including VMs that are in different availability zones. Common approaches include Azure Load Balancer and Azure Application Gateway. For more information, see Load balancing options.

Data replication between zones: You're responsible for any data replication that needs to happen between VMs, including across VMs in different availability zones. Databases and other similar stateful applications that run on VMs often provide capabilities to replicate data.

Behavior during a zone failure
This section describes what to expect when VM instances are configured with availability zone support and there's an outage in their availability zones.

Detection and response: You're responsible for detecting and responding to zone failures that affect your VMs.
Notification: Microsoft doesn't automatically notify you when a zone is down. However, you can use Azure Resource Health to monitor for the health of an individual resource, and you can set up Resource Health alerts to notify you of problems. You can also use Azure Service Health to understand the overall health of the service, including any zone failures, and you can set up Service Health alerts to notify you of problems.
Active requests: Any active requests or other work that occurs on the VM during the zone failure are likely to be terminated.

Expected data loss: Zonal LRS disks might be unavailable during a zone failure.

If you use zone-redundant storage (ZRS) disks and an outage affects your VM, you can force detach your ZRS disks from the failed VM. This approach allows you to attach the ZRS disks to another VM.

For more information about how to make disks resilient to availability zone failures and other problems, see Reliability in Azure Disk Storage.

Expected downtime: VMs remain down until the availability zone recovers.

Traffic rerouting: You're responsible for rerouting traffic to other VMs in healthy zones.

If you configure a zone-resilient load balancer and it performs health checks, the load balancer typically detects failed VMs and can route traffic to other VM instances in healthy zones.

Zone recovery
When the zone is healthy, VMs in the zone restart. You're responsible for any zone recovery procedures and data synchronization that your workloads require.

Test for zone failures
You can use Azure Chaos Studio to simulate the loss of a VM as part of an experiment. Chaos Studio provides built-in faults for VMs, including the ability to shut down a VM. You can use these capabilities to simulate zone-level failures and test your failover processes.

Custom multi-zone solutions for resiliency
When you deploy multiple VMs into different zones, you're responsible for configuring and managing replication, load balancing, failover, and failback processes.

Some applications provide built-in capabilities that can help when you deploy across multiple VMs. For example, SQL Server on Azure VMs provides a set of capabilities to simplify your configuration and management processes across availability zones.

You can consider using Azure Site Recovery zone-to-zone disaster recovery (DR) when your application runs in a single zone at a time and you don't require near-instant failover between zones. Zone-to-zone DR has some important limitations, so review your requirements thoroughly.

Resilience to region-wide failures
VMs are single-region resources. If the region becomes unavailable, your VM is also unavailable.

Custom multi-region solutions for resiliency
You can deploy multiple VMs into different regions, but you need to implement replication, load balancing, and failover processes.

Site Recovery is a service that enables DR by replicating VMs and their data to a secondary region. You can select almost any Azure region as your secondary region, including nonpaired region combinations. For more information, see Azure to Azure DR architecture.

Some applications create clusters or other constructs to replicate data and distribute work across multiple VMs, including in different regions. These applications can simplify the configuration of a multi-region solution.

For an example architecture that illustrates using VMs across multiple regions, see Multi-region load balancing with Azure Traffic Manager, Azure Firewall, and Application Gateway.

Resilience to service maintenance
Azure performs regular periodic maintenance on VMs to ensure reliability. There are multiple ways that you can ensure your workloads remain operational during maintenance activities:

When you use availability sets or virtual machine scale sets, you can configure update domains. Update domains help distribute maintenance activities across different VMs at different times, so your VMs don't all restart simultaneously.

You can customize the timing that maintenance is applied to your VMs by using maintenance control. You can use maintenance configurations to schedule it at a time that suits your workload.

You can receive notifications of upcoming maintenance activities.

For more information, see Guest updates and host maintenance overview.

Backup and restore
Azure Backup provides native backup support for VMs. Azure Backup creates and manages backups, and provides application-consistent protection for the entire VM, including all attached disks. A VM backup solution with Azure Backup is ideal when you need coordinated backup of multiple disks or application-aware backups. However, for database workloads, consider application-specific backup solutions that provide transaction-consistent protection and faster recovery options.

With Azure Backup for VMs, you can customize the backup frequency, retention duration, and storage configuration to suit your needs. For more information, see Azure Backup for VMs.

Backup also supports disks that are attached to VMs. For more information, see Overview of Azure Disk Backup.

For most solutions, you shouldn't rely exclusively on backups. Instead, use the other capabilities described in this guide to support your resiliency requirements. However, backups protect against some risks that other approaches don't. For more information, see What are redundancy, replication, and backup?.

Service-level agreement
The service-level agreement (SLA) for Azure services describes the expected availability of each service and the conditions that your solution must meet to achieve that availability expectation. For more information, see SLAs for online services.

For Virtual Machines, the SLA provides a base level of availability. The uptime percentage defined in the SLA increases when you have two or more VMs and you take the following actions:

Configure those VMs to be deployed across two or more availability zones.
Configure those VMs to be deployed into an availability set.
Next steps
VMs in Azure
Virtual Machine Scale Sets
Related resource
Reliability in Azure Disk Storage
Reliability in Azure
Note: The author created this article with assistance from AI. Learn more
Additional resources
Documentation

Availability options for Azure Virtual Machines - Azure Virtual Machines

Learn about the availability options for running virtual machines in Azure

What are Azure Availability Zones?

Learn about availability zones and how to use them to design resilient solutions.

Create a zoned VM with the Azure CLI - Azure Virtual Machines

Create a virtual machine in an availability zone with the Azure CLI

Show 4 more
Training

Module

Plan and implement updates, backups, and disaster recovery - Training

Plan for disaster recovery.

Certification

Microsoft Certified: Azure Virtual Desktop Specialty - Certifications

Plan, deliver, manage, and monitor virtual desktop experiences and remote apps on Microsoft Azure for any device.

Last updated on 01/22/2026
In this article
Production deployment recommendations
Reliability architecture overview
Resilience to transient faults
Resilience to availability zone failures
Resilience to region-wide failures
Resilience to service maintenance
Backup and restore
Service-level agreement
Next steps
Related resource
Was this page helpful?



